In Victorian time Michael Faraday gingerly liquefied gase inside thick - walled glass tube . By World War I , ingenuity and boldness of design allowed Harvard ' Percy W. Bridgman to reach much higher pressure along semi - industry lines . His large press disclosed innumerable new phase in familiar condensed matter , most famously several new crystalline phase of H2O . The most important early product was ammonia , made in the million of ton by reacting hydrogen and nitrogen gase at modest pressure .
Solid rock is denser than water , and our planet ' center lie a decisive 1,000 times deeper than the average - depth sea bottom . This rich question bear strongly on the literal root of all geology . 

By World War I , ingenuity and boldness of design allowed Harvard ' Percy W. Bridgman to reach much higher pressure along semi - industry lines . His large press disclosed innumerable new phase in familiar condensed matter , most famously several new crystalline phase of H2O .
The price of this mastery was not low: in 1922 a pressure container failed , steel flew like shrapnel and two men were killed , although the Harvard laboratory went on safely for decade more . Call the typical pressure at sea level one atmosphere .
Solid rock is denser than water , and our planet ' center lie a decisive 1,000 times deeper than the average - depth sea bottom . Work small ; a miniature - scale apparatu produce pressure to match a planet ' core simply by hand - tightening a single bolt! 

By World War I , ingenuity and boldness of design allowed Harvard ' Percy W. Bridgman to reach much higher pressure along semi - industry lines . The most important early product was ammonia , made in the million of ton by reacting hydrogen and nitrogen gase at modest pressure .
Solid rock is denser than water , and our planet ' center lie a decisive 1,000 times deeper than the average - depth sea bottom . This rich question bear strongly on the literal root of all geology .
Can we proceed with theory alone as guide ? It resemble more a top - of - the - line research microscope in the precision machining of it minute , elegant part and is not unlike it as well in bulk , weight and cost .

