Water on the moon In a cavern , in a canyon . . . The light , mountainous regions were obviously land . Such romantics have always hoped against hope that there might be some corner of the moon where water - - or , at least , ice - - did linger . Their best chance was that it might be found in some deep crater where the sun never shines and the temperature is therefore so low that ice would not evaporate .
In 1994 this area was probed with radar by Clementine , a scientific spacecraft unusual in that she was built by America 's Department of Defence , rather than the civilian National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( though NASA scientists have been heavily involved ) . Since Clementine was not actually fitted with a proper radar ( or any other instrument that could have probed for ice in the unlit polar regions ) , a group led by Stewart Nozette , of the American Air Force 's Phillips Laboratory in Alexandria , Virginia , thought of using the craft 's radio transmitter as a makeshift . 

Water on the moon In a cavern , in a canyon . Such romantics have always hoped against hope that there might be some corner of the moon where water - - or , at least , ice - - did linger .
The crater in question is the Aitkin basin , at the moon 's south pole .
In 1994 this area was probed with radar by Clementine , a scientific spacecraft unusual in that she was built by America 's Department of Defence , rather than the civilian National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( though NASA scientists have been heavily involved ) . Clementine 's mission was to test a set of optical instruments developed for the " Star Wars " strategic defence initiative of the 1980s . Ice and rock reflect radio waves differently .

Water on the moon In a cavern , in a canyon . Such romantics have always hoped against hope that there might be some corner of the moon where water - - or , at least , ice - - did linger . Their best chance was that it might be found in some deep crater where the sun never shines and the temperature is therefore so low that ice would not evaporate .
In 1994 this area was probed with radar by Clementine , a scientific spacecraft unusual in that she was built by America 's Department of Defence , rather than the civilian National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( though NASA scientists have been heavily involved ) . Ice and rock reflect radio waves differently . Nearby areas exposed to the sun 's rays , and similar areas at the moon 's north pole , looked , as expected , like bare rock .