A new class of drugs has brought the possibility that AIDS may now be a treatable disease . That is what many of the world 's AIDS researchers now believe they have done . After spending billions of dollars and marching up numerous blind alleys , they have developed a treatment that appears , on the basis of preliminary trials , to be able to put patients into remission . This means that their bodies can keep the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) , the agent that causes the disease , at such low levels that it appears to do no harm .
The immune system , the organ assaulted by HIV , is one of the most complicated in the body . Its cells ( known as lymphocytes ) grow and mature in bone marrow , and in a gland known as the thymus .
Viruses are usually specialists , and HIV specialises in a type of lymphocyte known as a helper T - cell .
The nine genes from hell Viruses are tiny , which is one reason that they need so much help reproducing . Most viruses are made of DNA ( their genes ) and protein . Yet both sorts of drug share the same underlying concept - - they jam the function of a crucial enzyme . 

A new class of drugs has brought the possibility that AIDS may now be a treatable disease . This means that their bodies can keep the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) , the agent that causes the disease , at such low levels that it appears to do no harm .
The immune system , the organ assaulted by HIV , is one of the most complicated in the body . Its cells ( known as lymphocytes ) grow and mature in bone marrow , and in a gland known as the thymus .
Viruses are usually specialists , and HIV specialises in a type of lymphocyte known as a helper T - cell .
The nine genes from hell Viruses are tiny , which is one reason that they need so much help reproducing . Most viruses are made of DNA ( their genes ) and protein . Yet both sorts of drug share the same underlying concept - - they jam the function of a crucial enzyme . Most viruses evolve by one mutation at a time - - it is not easy for them to exchange genes , as many living organisms do , by having any form of sex . 

A new class of drugs has brought the possibility that AIDS may now be a treatable disease . That is what many of the world 's AIDS researchers now believe they have done .
The immune system , the organ assaulted by HIV , is one of the most complicated in the body . Its cells ( known as lymphocytes ) grow and mature in bone marrow , and in a gland known as the thymus .
Anti - viral drugs , such as those in the newly developed cocktails , are designed to throw spanners into the reproductive works . They interfere with the defining peculiarity of retroviruses - - which is that , in order to get a host cell to pay attention to them , they must copy their RNA into DNA ( the usual currency in which genes are stored ) and then smuggle it into the host cell 's nucleus , where it can hide among the host genes and manipulate the cell 's operations . Stop this " reverse transcription " ( of RNA into DNA ) , and you stop the virus .
The new drugs , by contrast , clobber the virus after this , at the point where it sticks its nose out of its host 's nucleus and gets the cell 's machinery to start churning out new viral proteins . Yet both sorts of drug share the same underlying concept - - they jam the function of a crucial enzyme .
Dr Ho and Dr Shaw demonstrated that this theory was wrong . Most viruses evolve by one mutation at a time - - it is not easy for them to exchange genes , as many living organisms do , by having any form of sex .
There are also questions over what is known as the " bioavailability " of one of the drugs - - saquinavir .
The brain , therefore , may serve as a reservoir of last resort for the virus. ( Indeed , several researchers believe that the dementia suffered by some AIDS patients is nothing to do with the collapse of their immune systems , but is a direct effect of the virus on nerve cells ) . 